---
layout: post
title: test
author: Jimmy Mathews
---


Legal structure
---------------

In the United States there is a strong tradition of ...[non-profit/charity...]

The US IRS tax code provides for a series of formal legal organizational structures differing from the usual for-profit company or corporation in that the legal rights to the basic decision-making powers cannot be bought or sold, and the legal rights to capital accumulations via the organziation cannot be bought or sold. THey are called 501(x), where x is .....
The lay public, and the federal government, tends to think primarily of the tax exemption afforded to such organizations with respect to incomeearned, but this is not the main differentiation. The principal difference is, rather, what the government will not do with resepct to the organization. The government will not honor proprerty transfer agreements transferring power over the organization to an outside entitty in exchange for capital. As a result, outside entities rarely endeavor such exchanges with non-profit entittes.
Even when they do so successfully--e.g. the board of the organization is secretly bribed-- the "contract" is, formally, easily broken by the bribed party (since it does not have a legal sanction)

The book of dikljlkjl Taxlkj selgkj
Such organizations are generally required to dispose of their cash holdings at a certain rate...

Participation and membership
----------------------------

Funding
-------

If incorporated as a public charity, the organization can receive donations from donors wishing to get tax exemptions...

I propose that the individual participants are generally expected to contribute a sum of money in advance of the actual participation in the program, intended to cover expenses related to food preparation and facililties management, for the duration of their participation.
No special member status would be conferred on those who can afford to do this; participants who cannot afford to pay from personal income sources would not be barred from participation in any way. They would, however, be encouraged to petition a sponsoring institution, e.g. a college or university (e.g. if the participant is a student or faculty member), or town, or (perhaps, in some cases) a for-profit employer, to sponsor his or her participation in the program.

Duration; seasonality
---------------------

Scope
-----

Comparison with existing institutions
-------------------------------------

The organization will not be a school of any kind.
The principal function of the organization would be to solve the amalgamation/human resource problem within reasonable parameters, i.e. to organize an economic activity of the group of participants such that their collaboration towards the activity greatly reduces the work which each individual would otherwise have to perform in the standard labor market to accomplish a certain level of intellectual freedom; it is this basic goal which is the greatest similarity between my proposed community and the traditional monastic community (the economic structure). Make no mistake: This is absolutely a proposal for a planned economy, not a micro-democracy, with the attendant reduction in personal freedoms which one could conceivably enjoy outside the community walls. It is hoped that the insistence on small scale, on the order of about 40 people, and the possibility of comraderie, renders this complaint moot.

Neither will the organization function as a research center.

Location
--------

I think the main facility of the organization should be organized principally in a location which is remote in the following sense:
- Transportation between the main facility and the nearest social or economic units (e.g. towns) should be prohibitively difficult for casual travel or interaction.
- The group would be able to exercise unusually high freedom of activity in nearby lands without formal barriers ...

This arrangement is expected to encourage comraderie among the membership by limiting their casual interactions to the group and limiting their relations with outside entities to deliberate actions taken by the group as a whole (at least for the duration of the program).

To achieve this remoteness, a careful regulation of the internet must obviously be chosen. I propose the following simple arrangement: No internet access.

Some relevant reading:

 - The Communistic Societies of America (*Charles Nordhoff*, 1875)
 - Foundation (*Isaac Asimov*, 1951)
 - The Dispossessed (*Ursula Le Guin*, 1974)
 - Anathem (*Neal Stephenson*, 2008)

It is commonly assumed that the trouble with the academic community is that its practitioners operate without regard to the status of the outside world, and engage in purely individual pursuits for aesthetic gratification. In fact, this is nto true. ("Ivory Tower"). It would be more accurate to say that the practitioners actions are organized specific global paradigms; i.e. it is not that their work is insensitive to outside society, but rather that it is acutely sensitive to the desires of very specific global entities; the program and goals of these global entities are rarely aligned with the goals of the contributing human individuals; "Bait and switch". E.g. the high school student who studies science in high school because of human curiosity, nudged toward computer science in college, then towards an Operations Research masters program, then employed by a logistics unit in a large for-profit company to sell to small municipalities technological solutions to ordinary problems. 

[totalitarian; "Do it all for 'the math community'"]

Anxieties about contribution to society, in critical studies of professions and instuttuions: There is a pervasive force in global society, across professional boundaries, ..., whose consequence is that individuals are asked to contribute to society in ways which are defined so narrowly that the principal beneficiary for the duration of their work is only the individual itself, by means of monetary compensation.

Facilities, ritual
------------------

Most people considered in their current context, would probably be unsatisfied with life in the facility proposed here. Conversely most people would probably not be welcome... I suspect that the problem of over-participation is nto, in the end, very serious. IFOr, the people who would wish to live among ... ar eprobalby highly ...

This is in distinction  to various professional roles in the ordinary economy, for which the conditions of participation engender and necessitate competition.

Scale
-----

The scalability plan is that if the group of participants exceeds some chosen size, like N=50 members, then the main facility should be designed to accomodate up to (5/3)N participants, beyond which some plan would be made for a clone of the facility in a separate location, with the (5/3)N split into one group of (5/6)N to remain and (5/6)N to populate the new facility. 

The proposed seasonality dramatically increases the probably that the project will meet a minimum degree or standard of success, measured by the ability of the most dedicated members to continue to participate in the activities of the organization, by allowing partipants to honor prior commitments to friends, family, professional colleagues, etc.

It is true that the participation of people who have full-time careers would be severely limited by this seasonality. There are only two logical alternatives to that possibility.

One, to make some arrangement for the participation in the program itself to replace the full-time careers of willing participants. Defined correctly, this is a desirable and not impossible goal for the organization, but I strongly suspect that it is an impossible goal initially.
Two, to open the general activities of the organization to casual hourly participation by a presumably more general public. In my opinion the organization would not last long with such a structure.

("Drive-thru monastery")

On the other hand, there is a sizable group of individuals, students and faculty, belonging broadly to "the academy", for whom there is a notable season of long duration during which many professional obligations cease; it is not entirely a coincidence that this season exists and that it is also useful for my proposal. For, this time--the summer--is widely hailed by the students and faculty alike as a good time for personal research and non-traditional collaboration not unlike that being proposed here.

Far from being a financial burden on low-income participants, who would presumably have to work in a demanding service-sector environment during the summer months, it would perhaps be a boon to students and faculty seeking a non-competitive and interdisciplinary environment for collaborative projects and study.

(A reprieve from the "gig economy")

A careful discussion of the term "research" is warranted here.
...

Location
--------

I propose a rural location for the main facility: Vermont, New Hampshire, New Brunswick, Oregon, Washington State, Montana... . 
Certain regions in VT, NH, and WA have the advantage of a local culture broadly agreeable tot he aims of the project, which could be convenient in the long term in order to forge local affiliations.

Recall that it is proposed that the organization maintain 1-2 full-time administrative staff in an office in the nearest town, in order to coordinate agreements with the local government and businesses concerning land usage, supplies, etc., and to maintain the organization's accounts, tax disclosures, etc.

The climate is (so far) mild in these locations and would necessitate few major special facility systems, e.g. extensive heating or cooling, water procurement, while potentially allowing the possibility of supplementary garden food.

Desired: Approximately 20-50 miles from the nearest town, along a route carefully chosen with respect to both utilitarian and aesthetic considerations. No road access. 

Facilities
----------

Routine
-------

Relation to technologies
------------------------

I *strongly advocate* the delibrate instrumental use of technologies, old and new, for the solution of technical and logistical problems facing the establishment and daily practices of the organization. The unequivaocal denila of what is perceived to be a harmful technolgy on the basis of its being unfamiliar is what doomed the otherwise very noble Luddites, and every Neo-Luddite movement since then. ...

That means subjecting technical practices and artifacts to constant scrutiny, in order that the ones which we the humans decide further our aims be the ones which are actually chosen.

As an example: It may be reasonable to set up a wind or solar (photo-voltaic) electrical power system for the purpose of powering a modern refrigerator in order to address the food coordination and preservation problem. Yet, the whole system, from acquisition, to daily use, long-term maintenance, and disposal or dismemberment and recycling of the compressors, capture of the refrigerant if necessary, should be scrutinized and planned such that the system would not be adopted if it is decided that the community does not have the resources to carry out all aspects of the interaction responsibly. That will almost (but perhaps not always) imply a non-computerized and non-networked version of the technological solution to a given problem; even, probably, non-electrical. The same goes for the water distribution and plumbing system, the system for disposal of human and other organic wastes, the system for basic structural maintenance and repair of the buildings and grounds.

On the other hand, efficiency for the sake of "expanding leisure time" is not the only goal; it turns out that individuals often possess strong comparative valuations of labor activities which bear little relation to their utility to a planned economy. In other words, the economy plan should be explicitly cautious of situations in which marginal efficiency improvement with overall labor reduction is achieved by replacing a desirable labor activity with an undesirable one (as defined by the membership).

A note on expert utopians and economists: I think it is important to insist on a basic plan of the secular monastery which is reproducible by a more or less arbitrary group of interested ~50 individuals with diverse skills. If the planned economy requires a logistics expert to manage, or having master farmers, ... , then it is not likely to succeed for very long.








